# John Wiesner: Individual Capstone Assessment

## Introduction

When deciding on a topic for my senior-design project I wanted to choose something that would challenge me. I also wanted to choose a project that would allow me to apply what I have learned both in class and while on co-op. I will be taking the material I have learned while in class and apply it to real-world applications. The project I decided is to create a **virtual reality (VR) excavator simulator** that will be made public **on the Steam store**. This VR simulator allows me to improve my overall development skills from scoping, design, planning, implementation, polish, and publication. I will be completing this project as a one-person team because I felt that I should not rely on other team members to showcase the skills I have learned over the past five years of school and five co-op semesters.

## College Curriculum

The college curriculum will help guide my development process by giving me the steps needed to plan out a successful and completable project. After taking generic programming classes like **CS4003** Programming Languages, I know I prefer programming in C++ or C#. This allows me to use the game engine Unity3D since all the coding is done in the language C#. I then will use the strategies and architecture I learned in the classes **EECE3093C** Software Engineering and **CS5127** Requirements Engineering to scope out the project. It is important to get requirements of what the software/program will do before programming even starts. The **CS5167** User Interface class I took will allow me to create a simple but effective user interface and (in game) heads up display. I will also use knowledge from the class **CS2028C** Data Structures when storing level information, user statistics, and save data. Another smaller point I want to bring up is that depending on the required math for equipment controls I may end up using math learned in the class **Math2076** Linear Algebra. The final two classes, **ENGL4092** Technical and Scientific Writing and **Comm1071** Intro to Effective Speaking, will help my final presentation and documentation of this project.

## Co-op Experiences

My co-op experiences from Kinetic Vision will help guide the development of my senior project. The **advisor** I chose to oversee my project is **Kyle Hartshorn**, a group manager of the virtual + interactive solutions team at **Kinetic Vision**. Since I mostly got to develop mobile apps within Unity while at Kinetic Vision, I understand the fundamentals of the Unity game engine. My interest in VR has come from the last half of this past co-op semester since I helped out on a larger VR project. VR intrigued me and I wanted to spend more time learning the whole development process of creating a VR application outside of working on an already well-established project. I also will be able to apply my knowledge gained about programming best practices and source control. I learned most of these practices from **Eric Phillips** and **Berell McClellan** who are both software engineers at Kinetic Vision. Although I have not been part of the planning stages for most projects at Kinetic Vision, I was able to pick up some important development steps that I can apply to my senior design project. I have also learned many non-technical skills. Some of these include how to create deliverables, convey important changes to clients, how to manage time and budget, meet strong deadlines, and how to receive/implement constructive criticism of a project or feature.

## Motivation

My motivation for creating a VR excavator simulator is due to me being **fascinated with excavators and heavy machinery** but also my curiosity of VR development and publication. I also want to go to a place called [Extreme Sandbox](https://www.extremesandbox.com/gallery/) but it is located far away from Ohio so making this simulator will allow people from all over the world to experience an excavator. When researching to see if there were other VR excavator simulators, **I was unable to find any that the public was able to use within VR**. Most of them required one or more of the following: multi-monitors, custom hand joysticks, foot pedals, custom chair rig, and/or physically going to a simulator’s location for use. I want to create a simulator that only uses common VR devices (Ideally Oculus) with no extra equipment or controllers. The simulator should also be accessible to the public for free or behind a small paywall (ideally through the application library, Steam). Producing this type of application will also broaden my knowledge of game publication, production, and prototyping. This allows me to fully understand the whole process instead of just the programming aspect.

## Preliminary Project Approach

The first steps I plan on taking for this project is to **find** as many **other examples** of excavation mechanics. These mechanics could include digging, moving, particle simulation, rig attachments, optimizations, and procedures. One example I was able to find is a [short video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkiekFf5970&feature=youtu.be&t=83) by CM Labs. Once I find what the best implementation and limitations will be, I can then **scope out a high-level application design document** that describes what the deliverables will be. Completing these predetermined deliverables is what determines the application progress. In general, these deliverables will be a fully working Steam application that allows a user to use an excavator in VR. Some examples of these deliverables: the user can dig/fill holes, dispose of dirt into trucks, complete four or five pre-determined tutorial levels (learning controls, clear land of trees and boulders, dig a pond, install a covert pipe), switch control modes ([ISO and SAE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Excavator_controls#:~:text=The%20most%20commonly%20used%20control,motions%20(close%20%26%20dump))), and possibly switch buckets (2 variants). **To determine if I did a “good job” I would analyze what I learned, what mistakes did I do, what did I do great, and is the project stable/useable by the public.**
